# Lab 5


## Opening Notes

For those using Android Development Studio on the lab machines, here's what
 should get you up and running in the least frustrating way. And while the
 machine is working you can study the lab and prepare your work.

1. If you're using the emulator, start it as a standalone app right away
2. download the lab zipfile from the lms. Unzip it
3. Start ADS
4. Import the Lab project. It will fail to compile - no worries
5. Go to Tools->Android->SDK Manager
6. Launch the Standalone SDK Manager (link)
7. It will want to install ~11 packages - do it. (25min)
8. quit the standalone manger, start it back up
9. It will want to install ~6 packages - do it. (10min)
10. quit the standalone manger and the SDK Manager panel
11. Go to Tools->Android->Sync Project with Project Files
12. Clean the build
13. Build and proceed

Note that the app may fail to start once on the emulator. You can manually start it.

## Introduction

In this lab you will build an app that displays a scrolling list of
UNB courses (including course numbers, titles and credit
hours). Selecting a course will provide a description of that
course. The app will use the Master/Detail Flow pattern and fragments
to present a different UI on phones and tablets. On a phone, viewing
the scrolling list of courses, and viewing a course description, will
be achieved with two separate activities. On a wide enough device
(i.e., a tablet in landscape mode) the scrolling list of courses will
be on the left side, and the course descriptions will be on the
right. We will use a ```RecyclerView``` to present a scrolling list.

Import the Lab 4 skeleton project. This skeleton is a Master/Detail
Flow template (automatically generated by AndroidStudio) with an
additional two class files representing a data model for the courses
and their descriptions. Some of the ```.java``` files contain
additional ```TODO``` items, which you will be completing later in the
lab.


## Understanding the skeleton code

Inside the Java resource directory notice the ```dummy```
subdirectory. Accessing the ```DummyContent``` class will reveal a
demonstration of how the Master/Detail Flow template creates items. If
you scroll to the bottom of this class you'll see there is a public
static class that represents a ```DummyItem```.

We will be similarly providing content in this manner, but we're using
a ```Course``` item and separating our data processing concerns into a
separate class called ```DataModel```. You can find out what a
```Course``` item contains inside the ```Course``` Java resource
file. The ```DataModel``` class accesses a ```JSON``` asset file
included in the project (in ```res/assets/CS.json```). This ```JSON```
file contains information about Computer Science courses available at
UNB. The ```DataModel``` class processes the ```JSON``` to create
individual ```Course``` items.

Your job will be to get an instance of this ```DataModel``` and wire
```Course``` items to the ```RecyclerView``` (in
```CourseListActivity.java```) for use in this template. On a tablet
```Course``` name and ID will be presented in a scrolling
```RecyclerView``` component down the left side, with the ```Course```
description accompanying the currently selected course appearing on
the right. On a phone, these presentations will be achieved with two
separate activities. That is the flexibility afforded by Master/Detail
Flow.

The Master/Detail Flow pattern employs multiple default layout files
to make the UI adapt to different screen sizes and orientations

* activity_course_detail.xml
* activity_course_list.xml
* course_detail.xml
* course_list.xml
  * course_list.xml
  * course_list.xml (w900dp)
* course_list_content.xml


The best way to get your bearings in an existing project file is to
navigate to the ```AndroidManifest.xml``` and determine which
```Activity``` (represented by your Java source code files) contains
the ```<intent-filter>``` signifying it’s the ```MAIN```
```Activity```. This ```Activity``` will be identified by the
```android:name``` field. You can navigate to this Java file and see
which layout file it instantiates using ```setContentView()```; this
will be the first screen users are presented with when this
application is run. Navigate to the layout file being utilized by
```setContentView()``` in your ```MAIN``` ```Activity```.

Take a look at this and other layout files in both the Text and Design
editors. Recall that fragments must be hosted by an ```Activity```;
here, those ```Activity``` layouts are represented by
```activity_course_detail.xml``` and
```activity_course_list.xml```. Investigating
```activity_course_list.xml``` we can see it contains a
```FrameLayout``` that includes the layout
```course_list.xml```. Given there are two ```course_list.xml```
files, the Android operating system must decide which layout to
present. It does this based on screen size (which can be affected by
orientation). Here, the layout file containing ```w900dp``` will be
the one used for tablets in landscape mode, allowing both course list
and the details of the selected course to be displayed simultaneously
side-by-side. The layout file without a screen size modifier is the
one that will be used for phones.

Take a look at the phone ```course_list.xml``` layout. Inside it we
see a single UI element, a ```RecyclerView``` (a flexible view for
providing a limited window into a large data set). The
```RecyclerView``` will be used as a scrolling list of available
courses that, once selected, will present a detailed description about
that particular course.

Going back to the ```CourseListActivity``` Java file we'll now explore
how how fragments get managed based on what screen size we are running
on. Notice that ```CourseListActivity``` has a private boolean
variable ```mTwoPane```. This member variable represents whether we
are running on a screen size appropriate for displaying both the
course list and course details simultaneously. If this variable is not
```true```, we assume we are running on a smaller screen device such
as a phone and the Android OS will deliver the layout necessary to fit
that screen size. If the variable is ```true``` the Android OS will
deliver the layout details necessary to put that user experience into
effect.

The ```CourseListActivity``` class ```onCreate()``` method will
instantiate the ```MAIN``` ```Activity```, provide it the described
layout in ```setContentView()```, and handle managing ```Fragment```
attachments. Because we are designing our application for a positive
user experience on both phone and tablet, there are some important
details regarding how this is accomplished. First, notice we
instantiate a ```FragmentManager```. This manager will control which
fragments are active in the application based on the logic we provide
(in this case, the logic implemented by the Master/Flow Detail
template).

This template checks if the ```course_detail_container```, which is
a ```NestedScrollView``` UI element in the
```activity_course_detail.xml```, is ```null```. If the
```course_detail_container``` is ```null```, we are in single pane
layout (i.e., a phone or tablet in portrait mode); if the
```course_detail_container``` is not ```null```, we are in a dual pane
layout (i.e., a tablet in landscape mode) utilizing fragments.

Now open the ```DataModel``` class. Note the member variables for this
class include a ```Context``` which is taken in as a parameter in the
constructor. Why does this class require a ```Context```? Note that in
the ```processJSON``` method we are parsing the JSON to create
```Course``` objects to populate the ```coursesArray``` member
variable. Under the ```/assets/``` project folder, investigate the
structure of the JSON from which the data is being pulled. Each
```Course``` object is built using these details.

## Implementation

Now that you have an understanding of how the skeleton code works,
modify the skeleton to display course information by completing the
following TODOs:

**1.** Complete TODO 1 through 8 in ```CourseListActivity```

**2.** Complete TODO 9 through 11 in ```CourseDetailFragment```

#### Deliverable

Show your working app to the instructor or TA.
